If the AI narrative hits a wall, there's
no question in my mind that the US
economy starts to go pedilesly close to
recession.
>> Welcome to another episode of WSJ's Take
on the Week. I'm Telis Demos
>> and I'm Hannah Aaron Lang.
>> So this week we've got a big
conversation about AI and the economy.
Not just AI in the market, AI and the
economy. How do those two things
interact? Lots of good questions and a
very interesting conversation on that
coming up. But before we get there,
we've got a big slate of economic data
this upcoming week. We've also got a lot
more central bank decisions coming.
We're going to have them from Japan,
Europe, England, and of course, we had
the US central bank's big decision this
past week.
>> Exactly. The Fed announced its big move
last week. They announced a quarter
point cut, which I think was pretty much
what everybody on Wall Street was
expecting. Uh they also announced that
they would start purchasing some
Treasury bills again which um viewers of
this show might perhaps have expected
based on our conversation last week.
>> That's right. We had a great
conversation with BNY's Nate WFL about
the Fed's balance sheet decision. Now
the question for investors is what's the
Fed going to do next? Is the Fed going
to hold where it is or is it going to
cut again in 2026? There was some
dissent to this particular decision. Uh
there was one voter who thought that the
Fed should cut even more and there were
two voters who thought the Fed should
not cut. People were discussing whether
or not what the Fed was going to do was
going to be everybody knew it was going
to be a cut. But was it going to be a
dovish cut or a hawkish cut? Dovish
meaning the central bank is really
worried about the economy and is of the
mindset to cut more. Hawkish meaning the
Fed is really worried about inflation
and it wants to start raising rates.
People thought it was going to be a
hawkish cut that Jerome Powell would
slam the door shut on a cut next year,
but now people are talking about it like
it was a dovish cut.
>> Yeah. He left the door open for lower
rates in 2026.
>> Yeah. He made some comments that people
jumped on, which is that, you know, that
his view was that the the collective
wisdom of the Fed was that a lot of what
we were seeing in inflation was tariff
driven right now, not a permanent
increase in the rate of inflation. that
people at the Fed saw a pathway back to
we're now 3%ish,
a pathway back to 2%ish inflation. And
those things mean that maybe the Fed
could cut rates next year. Certainly, he
didn't say one way or another, but like
you said, he left the door more open
than people were expecting.
>> So that probably puts us back on data
watch, right? Which means that there's a
lot of wait on this upcoming CPI report,
the inflation rate coming out later this
week.
>> Absolutely. I think the next CPI report
is going to be really important for how
investors think about the Fed's next
moves. Uh the Cleveland Fed is
forecasting that the November inflation
rate, that's year-over-year change in
the CPI index, will be around 3%. That's
kind of where it's been. That was where
it was in the last official readings we
got back in September. That's where some
of the forecasts had it for October,
which is a number we don't have yet
because of the shutdown. So inflation
not really going up but also not like
really hugely coming down and staying
around in that stubborn 3% zone. So you
know still running high but but but at
least people see a path for it to come
back down.
>> It's getting better. It's improving.
Perhaps
>> the direction of travel maybe is right
over the last few months
>> and that makes the Supreme Court
decision about tariffs really important.
Right.
>> Absolutely. whether or not the Supreme
Court says the Trump administration, you
know, overstepped its bounds in creating
the reciprocal tariffs and then what
what importantly what would be done
about that if they did think that. That
decision is expected. We're not really
sure when, but we're looking for it. In
the meantime, though, I think the stock
market's going to be pretty reactive to
this particular decision, especially
consumer stocks because consumer
companies have been reporting some of
the pressures of inflation and tariffs
in particular. We had AutoZone report
last week and their stock tumbled quite
a bit on their earnings report because
tariffs cut into their profitability
pretty meaningfully. So I think a hot
inflation report would be uh pretty
pretty scary for a lot of consumer
stocks because I think the market is
looking at these companies and saying
boy maybe they've just really hit their
limit of passing price increases along.
>> And related to that we have companies
like General Mills and Nike reporting
earnings this coming week. Um analysts
are actually expecting falling earnings
from General Mills in part because
consumers are cutting back perhaps
because of the continued impact of
inflation tariffs as you mentioned and
they might be switching from say name
brand cereals to generic ones and that's
hurting you know hurting profits for for
a company like General Mills.
>> Yeah, I think consumer earnings are
really important to the market's
thinking right now. I also think that
there's a big kind of global context
too, especially to what the Fed is
doing, and that's what's happening with
other central banks. This upcoming week
is jam-packed with big-time bank
decisions. We've got the European
Central Bank, we have the Bank of
England, and the Bank of Japan all
making their next interest rate
decisions. And I think the one that's
going to be in focus the most among
those will be the Bank of Japan because
the Bank of Japan is probably the most
hawkish of those. They might be
increasing their interest rates. That's
what some signals have suggested. That
is something that I think US investors
are really looking at as an indication
of well, if Japanese interest rates are
going higher while US interest rates are
going lower, does that mean that more
kind of investor money flows into JGBs,
Japanese government bonds, and out of
treasuries? And that's something that
has been a big theme of sort of the
market's thinking over the past year and
into next year as well. And that's
generally part of this question of
whether investors want to shift more of
their money outside of the US away from
from US stocks. So I think that'll be an
important uh thing to watch in kind of
global economics. Sometimes those feel
remote, but I think this is a decision
that might actually be pretty impactful
to the markets here.
>> Yeah. And of course, if central banks
move in opposing directions from the
Federal Reserve, that could continue to
put pressure on the dollar, reacelerate
or continue to accelerate that
dolization trend that you mentioned. And
I think that what might be even more
important for consumers and consumerf
facing companies is not inflation or
interest rates, but whether or not folks
are sort of able to keep spending money,
right? And that depends in large part on
whether or not they have a job.
>> Absolutely. We're going to get the
November jobs report uh this upcoming
week. We might even additionally get
some October data. And what I think will
be interesting about this report is the
extent to which things are read into it
that have to do with artificial
intelligence, AI, and the impact that's
having on the job market. I think when
most people talk about AI, think about
AI, they think about whether or not it
will replace things that people do. And
that has two impacts, right? On the one
hand, it makes people more productive.
You can do more, right? the the the
tools you have in front of you can
suddenly, you know, kind of process more
and think more and help you make better
decisions. But it means that some people
might not have a job anymore. There was
a lot of interest in Amazon. They made a
big announcement laying off 14,000
corporate workers. They might do it up
to 30 and that's 10% of their white
collar workforce.
to the extent that that's AI related
maybe is debatable but it's raising the
question and the journal's economics
writers have been saying for a while now
that that we really need to start to
reckon with this impact will that come
in this next report unclear will it be a
big factor in 2026 so to help us think
through that we talked to AJ Rajidex he
is the global chairman of research at
Barclays he thinks pretty broadly about
what's going on in the markets and the
economy and tries to connect those
things a lot like we do here on this
show and we're going to have that
conversation ition after the break.
Welcome back. We're here with AJ Rajex.
He is the global chairman of research at
Barclays. He was previously the head of
all fixed income research at Barclays
and was on the Treasury's borrowing
committee. So, we've got a jobs report
coming up this coming week. And correct
me if you feel differently, but I feel
like it's starting to be that when we
talk about the jobs report, we're also
talking about AI, right? And we're
talking about the impact of AI on
employment. I know it's been floating
around at the margins for a long time.
Will people's jobs be replaced by
>> an AI agent uh doing their job, but I
think it's starting to actually filter
into what companies are doing. What do
you expect we might see from the next
jobs report or the next two or three
jobs report? Will that be evident?
>> No. So that's the short answer. Now
remember, we're getting the October
print also and we know that the October
print was going to be bad because
[snorts] that's when the government
employees who took the fork in the road
all start to show up and we would have
had a negative print which we probably
will see
>> losing jobs
>> losing jobs.
>> But people know that they understand the
reasons for that. They know it's a
one-time thing not indicative of the
economy.
>> Okay. So you think that the story of at
least this next batch of data is not
going to be AI. It's going to be more
about what's going on with the
government.
>> It's still traditional macro, if you
will. This is not the first time that
we've had completely gamechanging
technologies, you know, start to diffuse
into an economy. Historically, the way
things have worked is you almost never,
no matter how game-changing a technology
there is, you almost never see net job
losses coming from it in an expansion.
But eventually you do have a recession
and on the way back up companies say
wait a minute this is great new
technology I can now do you know the
things I could I needed three people for
with two I'm just going to not hire that
third person that's when productivity
kicks in that's when you have technology
truly hurting jobs but away from that
the more insidious impact is a
gravitational pull lower on wages that's
where it shows up
>> interesting you mentioned that companies
might not fire people but for for
specific AI reasons. But if they have to
lay them off for economic reasons, when
they do go back to hire, they hire fewer
people. Could that be an opening for AI
to replace some of those people rather
than those companies actually going out
and doing the hiring that they might
have been planning on doing last year?
>> It is an opening. I do think that there
is a little bit of a lack of new job
creation happening on the front end of
the job market. So one of the things
everyone's watching tell us is the
difference in the unemployment rate
between the younger part of the
workforce and the prime age population
and that gap has been steadily
increasing.
>> Now it is still back to only historical
levels because in postcoid right when we
were desperate for bodies
>> it collapsed but at this point if it
keeps going higher
>> then you will start to see the impact of
AI not so much in people getting fired
but in new people not getting hired.
That is absolutely true.
>> And what about the shortterm
outlook for the AI buildout? So
obviously people are building they're
borrowing money to build data centers.
Is that going to be a short-term
economic engine? And while the answer
seems obviously yes, I think you know my
again my colleagues at the journal have
also written that that the thing about
AI data centers is that like AI itself,
they're not that labor intensive. like
once you build it,
>> you don't need to necessarily staff them
up so aggressively. [snorts] But but
maybe that building process will itself
take enough time that it'll be an
economic stimulant. What do you see as
the short-term AI buildout stimulus?
>> So AI has mattered in two ways for 2025.
The more visible way is the wave of AI
capex sweeping the nation, right?
>> Uh a gigantic data center, you know,
names that sound fantastical. Project
Micah, Stargate, uh Colossus, I mean
these, you know, these are all the
center the size of Manhattan people
>> basically right and there there's tens
of them that are being built across the
country the United States is in the
middle not the end of the single biggest
industrial investment cycle since the
second world war and that includes the
telecom buildout of the late 1990s and
of course there's no question that it
has supported the economy by our
estimate just AI spending added 1% to US
growth this year the reason why the US
economy shrugged off the trade war so
effortlessly. Remember the worries in
April of how oh all businesses will pull
back? Well, you know, turns out you
don't really care whether General Motors
is building a new factory or not. If
Google comes out and says we're going to
spend 90 billion more this year and
there's six other names where that came
from. But the other place where it
mattered is virtually all of the support
for the equity market has come from AI
heavy names. they have driven about 80
to 90% of the equity markets returns and
that has supported the wealth effect
which has supported consumption. When
consumers in the United States feel
richer, they spend more. So there's been
those two big drivers. So yes, if the AI
narrative hits a wall, there's no
question in my mind that the US economy
starts to go perilously close to
recession in 2026. AI is a lynch pin
like it's not
>> absolutely
>> goes belly up.
>> We can't just write that off.
>> It's a huge problem. Now the reason why
I'm confident is because I again I'm
going by at to some extent at face
value. But look at the statements from
Mark Zuckerberg, right? I would rather
overspend by a couple of hundred
billion, not million. He would rather
overspend $200 billion than take the
risk of not spending enough. That does
though sound scary though as an
investor, right? All of these these uh
you know bonds being issued, debt being
raised, is there the risk that even if
the AI investment cycle works out and
anticipated in the sense that it
delivers this technology that we can all
use, are there going to be enough losers
that that there's just some inevitable
kind of cyclical correction at some
point over the next few years? The
difference with 2000 was you said it
yourself you had a proper default cycle
in US telecom
the listed names about half of their AI
spend this year basically most of their
AI spend this year has been through free
cash flow and that has basically been
only half of their free cash flow you
know what they've used the other half
for still stock buybacks they just make
that kind of money now the unlisted
names yes there's also this issue of
>> you're talking about the the companies
that are private like open AI,
>> right? The open AI, the entropics, the
perplexities. They have to show me the
money. They have to show me the
revenues. You know, they I'm not saying
they won't, but that's where the market
is likely to be more skeptical, is
likely to be willing to, you know, not
give them as much time. But you will
have some hurdles along the way. You
will have surefire winners that suddenly
turn turn out to have no moes, you know,
no nothing's that distinguishes them.
the switching costs right now on a
retail
uh app that that you and I use are
nothing. I mean you know I can use a
gemini I can use a perplexity I can use
a charged there's it does it's not clear
what the differentiating factor is right
it's not like there are network effect
so there I can imagine the markets being
being worried but unless you tell me
that a Google or a Microsoft or a meta
spends so much and so much of it is debt
finance that it ultimately goes belly up
which honestly I can't for the world of
me imagine happening
>> I I don't think this is anywhere close
to a big cyclical will pull back in the
near future.
>> So you mentioned the wealth effect. Y
>> and we talk a lot about that around
here.
>> The stock market going up makes people
feel wealthier. It supports their
spending and investment. But whenever we
do talk about that, we get a lot of
feedback from our audience that not
everybody is enjoying that wealth
effect.
>> And we also talk a lot about K-shaped
recoveries. you know, one up, one down,
two speed.
>> Is what's going on in AI that on the
ground l literally economic activity
enough to help support consumers who
have struggled with relatively high
interest rates,
inflation that's been passed through
either from tariffs or other sources to
consumer prices? Can the market keep
going
e even if there's a segment of people
who are either losing their job because
of AI or just not enjoying the same
benefits?
>> So two things can be right at the same
time that seem mutually exclusive but
they are not. The market can keep going
up and the lower end of the K has a
problem. There are 165 million people
employed in the United States. 8 million
less than 5% are in construction.
Existing home sales are very weak. New
home sales are very weak. Funnily
enough, not a single construction job
has been lost yet. Net. And the reason
is because when you some skill sets are
funible in 2023 and 24, we saw this
giant boom in non-residential
construction because of the chipsack the
for 2025 and 26. We are seeing this
giant boom in data center construction.
Power companies lay down turbines.
Telecom companies lay down you know
support grids. You do have general
contractors and roofers and plumbers. A
lot of these skill sets are funible. So
to that extent AI is helping the lower
end of the K. But but the lower end of
the K does have problems. The thing is
it is not enough to drag down the upper
end of the K. But US households now have
collectively in aggregate more of their
more percentage of their net worth in
equities than they have ever had. They
own 47 trillion or through everything
through direct stocks, through pension
funds, through mutual funds, 47 trillion
of equities. If that falls 30% that's a
15 trillion hit and that means
consumption pulls back by about 500 to
600 billion. That's your recession. But
in the absence of that, even as the
lower end of the K is struggling, it's
not enough to drag down the upper end.
>> The US is obviously not the only country
pursuing AI, many others are. Uh, and I
want to talk about Japan. Japan's been
in the focus for investors because of
this expectation that later this month,
the Bank of Japan might be raising
interest rates while the US is cutting
them. And Japan's market has been doing
very well. And Japan has been talking
about its own spending and investment in
artificial intelligence. You know,
adding money to its budget uh for its
own technology and chips and and and
buildout.
>> Should US investors be thinking just
about the US when it comes to the AI
trade? Or are there other markets where
there might be even bigger
opportunities? Or because of weakness in
the dollar for various reasons that have
to do with politics and other things,
should investors still be looking
abroad? Do you think that that trade
will still be will will work again in
2026 the way it has this year?
>> I think it will, just not in terms of
the European market outperforming the US
as it did in the first 6 months. But
Japan and Korea
>> absolutely the United States is
indisputably in the lead when it comes
to the compute build. No question about
it.
>> But the eventual winners tend to be the
winners on the use case side. So I'll
give you an example. The winners of
refrigeration were not any of the
refrigeration companies. The single
biggest winner by far was Coca-Cola.
Ever tried a hot coke? Not fun.
>> No. [clears throat]
>> You know, so so if you That's a great
point.
>> The the the historically if you look at
the last 30, 40, 50 years, the Japanese
have been very good at adaptation of a
technology. So I Yes, I am bullish. They
are relatively small equity markets
though. That's the only thing to come in
keep in mind.
>> I see. I see. So, do you think though
that that investors will shift money out
of the US to derisk a little bit from
AI? People have just talked about that.
Okay, even if you can see things going,
maybe it just makes sense to rebalance
and put some chips in other markets in
other currencies. Do you think that
force will continue or do you think that
the US could once again be the magnet?
So not only do I not think that force
will continue, I don't think it actually
continued in the second half of this
year.
>> Okay.
>> So the first half of this year, there
was no question that there was a move
away from the United States. You could
argue that part of it was the the
rhetoric around the trade war also upset
a lot of foreign investors. But in the
second half of the year, US equities
outperformed European equities. More
importantly, US bond markets
outperformed every other major developed
bond market. If you look at the US
30-year, for example, it did really
well. Then you look at the Japanese
30-year or the French 30-year or the UK,
it, you know, very much the very much
the opposite. So the the one place where
people are paying more attention is that
they continue to invest in the US, but
they are now hedging their dollar risk.
All right, we're going to take a quick
break and when we come back, one more
question for AJ Rodex of Barclays.
So, we've been talking about a two-speed
economy, a K-shaped economy.
>> Are there things that you're looking at
that might help that bottom part of the
market, the people who are maybe not big
stock owners, they're not feeling that
big wealth effect, maybe their job or
their livelihood in some way is being
impacted by AI. What do you think is
going to happen to that consumer in
2026?
>> I think the single biggest thing that
hurts those people is lower rates.
There's no question. So what are they up
against? They are up against stubbornly
sticky inflation. Not not egregious. You
know, we're not running at 8% but we
have been stuck with headline around 3,
three and a half, right? Code two and a
half to three. They are looking at a
weak job market. You know, job creation
has been mediocre all year. The
unemployment rate has drifted about 30
basis points higher in 2025
and they are looking at mortgage rates
that are about 300 basis points higher
than right after co right so those three
things are coming together now the
problem that they have is that the
economy is something in aggregate
overall it's still doing well next year
will probably grow a little bit stronger
than that so the Fed is limited in how
much it can cut and even if cuts, say it
cuts to a level that is not justified by
the economics. Well, the front end rate
doesn't matter. What matters is a 7 to
10 year point on the bond curve. And
that point on the bond curve might say,
"Okay, we are now worried about
inflation and nominal yields go higher."
So the best thing that could happen for
those people is that we see a very
visible productivity jump where the Fed
can get together and say okay this is
like the green Spaniards the late 1990s
not the bubble and bust but where
remember his his insight was yes the
economy is growing faster than I think
but it's not going to overheat because
of productivity I can cut rates if you
get to that point I think that will that
will help but otherwise there's not a
whole that can be done. It just is what
it is.
>> Well, AJ, thanks so much for joining us.
This has been a really interesting
conversation.
>> Thank you.
[music]